---
title: "Techno-Necromancy"
date: 2023-10-23 14:00:00 -0700
Author: "Zach Wilder"
Categories:
  - Rambles
tags:
    - Life
assets: "2023-10-23"
---

Well, my ambition to change the blog to a collection of posts about what I'm
currently doing apparently didn't pan out for me posting more often. Time to
bring the blog back from the dead - some techno-necromancy. 

What's happened in the three years and change since the last post? A lot,
actually. Ignoring the political landscape and all the nonsense from the COVID
times is hard, and probably why I didn't feel motivated to write anything about
what I was doing with my personal life.

In 2020, my family and I relocated to small town coastal Oregon from the
sprawling metropolis of Phoenix, AZ. Work had an opportunity, I took a leap. The
Oregon coast is absolutely gorgeous - but we **very** quickly learned that it is
much nicer to visit (briefly) than to live. Work was challenging in many new and
unexpected ways (there's too many trees here!). The three of us struggled to
adapt, and probably due to our stubborness we made it work.

Surrounded by the beauty of the coast, we tried to make the most out of living
there. On our 45 minute drives every week to the grocery store we'd pass dozens
of new and exciting hiking trails - so we spent a lot of time hiking and
exploring. We acquired a canoe, and took that out whenever we could. 

{{<fancybox_gallery id=0
  src1="2020-1.jpg"
  src2="2020-2.jpg"
  src3="2020-3.jpg"
>}}

{{<fancybox_gallery id=0
  src1="2020-4.jpg"
  src2="2020-5.jpg"
>}}

In the middle of 2021 we realized that living on the coast wasn't going to work
for all of us - Kara needed to start school and the coastal schools were awful.
Trying to get information from them was impossible during the pandemic, and it
turns out the school in the podunk hole we moved to wasn't even a real school -
it was a charter school. The closest "real" schools were 45 minutes to an hour
away. Obviously, a serious problem - the yokels on the coast just advocated
"homeskoolin' with a healthy dose of Sunday skool." (Not even joking, we passed
church signs and school signs on the coast with simple words misspelled
frequently).

I came up with a plan - my employer up here had 7 people spread throughout the
state, and I was the only one with experience in the job. I was also completely
isolated from the rest of the team, the closest area to mine was 2-3 hours away.
My coworkers were struggling, and the utility was frustrated with having to
train people. They needed a supervisor, and I wanted out of my current role. I
mentioned to a couple of the utility foresters that the position was needed, and
that I wanted it. It didn't take much coercion to get them to ask my manager to
post a supervisor position.

I applied, and then was interviewed. I got the job officially in July of 2021,
and for the next few months life was hectic. My working area was now the state
of Oregon (Portland to Medford, Bend to the coast). I spent the week living in
motels (Grants Pass has, officially, the worst places to stay in all of Oregon),
and the weekends painstakingly packing all of our stuff and moving it to a
storage unit in Eugene. My partner (who is amazing) handled the packing and
getting our house on the coast on the market. We decided to try and move to
Eugene - not quite a real city, just big enough to be comfortable, great
schools, and centrally located for work. We found a realtor, but the housing
market was (is) insane. We hit the market at just the right time where things
started selling for way over asking, with no inspections, almost as soon as they
were listed. It worked out alright for getting our house sold, but it threw the
three of us into a strange borderline homeless situation.

Again, probably due to stubbornness, we made it work. My job was already paying
for hotels for me to stay at during the week - we just had to cover the
weekends. We took advantage, traveled around, explored, and saw some of the
coolest parts of the state. 

We put out many (many) offers on houses, and were quickly rejected. We were
starting to get tired of the constant moving and hotel/airbnb life. Then, in
October 2021, we found the coolest little house in the nicest part of Eugene (with
the best school district). It had been on the market for a couple weeks - which
was wild. We asked our realtor to see it - well, the walls inside were painted
in bright gaudy colors, there was no flooring (just the subfloor), the tiny
bathroom had no vanity and a massive claw-foot tub, broken windows,  and the
outside painted a bright turquoise blue. It felt like home right away so we
excitedly put an offer out. It was accepted, the inspection process turned up
nothing that wasn't obvious (it's super neat paying a ton of money to someone to
tell you that there are no floors and the windows don't open). 

We closed on the house the weekend after Thanksgiving, and moved our duffel bags
and air mattresses in. We were excited to get a u-haul and schlep all the stuff
from storage... and then it snowed. It snowed a lot. So, the only things we
grabbed out of the unit were the holiday decorations. 

{{<fancybox_gallery id=1
  src1="2021-1.jpg"
  src2="2021-2.jpg"
  src3="2021-3.jpg"
>}}

{{<fancybox_gallery id=1
  src1="2021-4.jpg"
  src2="2021-5.jpg"
  src3="2021-6.jpg"
>}}

{{<fancybox_gallery id=1
  src1="2021-7.jpg"
  src2="2021-8.jpg"
  src3="2021-9.jpg"
>}}

Our daughter started kindergarten January of 2022, and we eventually got all of
our stuff moved in and unpacked. Our house is much smaller than the one on the
coast, and a little smaller than the one in Phoenix. The view out our windows is
magical though. A family of deer live in our backyard, and are constantly
peeking in our windows (part of our house is "in" a hillside, so the windows are
at ground level). There are trees everywhere - big Douglas firs, charismatic
maples, white oaks, apples. Our back porch looks out over the hill, and where we
are situated we can't see our downhill neighbors unless we try. There is a few
gangs of wild turkeys that roam the streets, and two of them live in the tree in
our front yard. We have an incredible hiking trail system literally right across
our street that goes through miles of protected area. 

Work balanced out and got much easier - my commute is only an hour most days,
and I've been able to really strengthen and expand the team here. 

We settled into a new groove. Started exploring more new places, hiked new
trails, took the canoe to new spots. Spent time picking fruits and vegetables at
u-pick farms near us. Kara really took off in school, and quickly made friends. 

{{<fancybox_gallery id=2
  src1="2022-1.jpg"
  src2="2022-2.jpg"
  src3="2022-3.jpg"
>}}

{{<fancybox_gallery id=2
  src1="2022-4.jpg"
  src2="2022-5.jpg"
  src3="2022-6.jpg"
>}}

{{<fancybox_gallery id=2
  src1="2022-7.jpg"
  src2="2022-8.jpg"
>}}

2023 has been a good year. It feels good living in one spot, and our little
turquoise house on the hill feels more and more like home. Kara finished first
grade strong and is enjoying second grade. I've been spending as much time as
possible adventuring with my partner (and best friend). We picked more produce
from different farms this year, and scavenged tons of fruit from the
neighborhood - pears, apples, plums, blackberries, grapes. The neighbor across
the street grows an insane tomato garden every year, and shared his bounty with
us. Our deer family hangs out with us so frequently that we can easily tell them
apart - "Mom" and her babies from 2021, 2022, and 2023. The trees we planted in
the yard are growing well, and even gave us a few Asian pears. We have
strawberries growing, and just acquired some concord grape cuttings.

{{<fancybox_gallery id=3
  src1="2023-1.jpg"
  src2="2023-2.jpg"
  src3="2023-3.jpg"
>}}

{{<fancybox_gallery id=3
  src1="2023-4.jpg"
  src2="2023-5.jpg"
  src3="2023-6.jpg"
>}}

{{<fancybox_gallery id=3
  src1="2023-7.jpg"
  src2="2023-8.jpg"
  src3="2023-9.jpg"
>}}
