---
title: "Mieke, Part 1"
date: 2023-12-15 11:00:00 -0700
Author: "Zach Wilder"
Categories:
  - Rambles
tags:
  - Life
  - Mieke
assets: "2023-12-15"
---

It's hard to tell stories about someone who means so much to you, who has left a
massive mark on your life, and whose presence will be missed more than I can
possibly describe. I decided the best way was to just start at the beginning,
and write stories as I thought of them. This is the first in a series of posts
about Mieke, starting at the beginning and roughly chronicling the past 13
years.

<!--more-->

---

In March of 2011, I was working at a chain pet store in Phoenix, AZ - a
decent enough job to get me through. One day, the crusty old lady who worked the
front asked me as I joined her at the next register - "Hey, do you
want a German Shepard puppy? I know a guy who's trying to get rid of one." 

Yeah, sure, why not? I love dogs. Always have. She told me the guy would meet me
outside after my shift. I didn't really think it through, honestly. I was riding
my bike to work then (didn't even have a car). I lived with two other people (a
good friend and his girlfriend), who probably should have been consulted. I was
barely making enough money to feed myself and pay my share of rent/utilities.

My shift ended that afternoon, and I went outside to wait for the guy. As
promised, he showed up in a beat up maroon van. Didn't even park, just stopped
in front of the store. Jumped out, walked around to the side and asked if I was
the guy who wanted the dog. He didn't really wait for a reply, slid the van door
open, and pulled out a small black puppy with huge feet. He put her in my arms.
She was so small, and looked at me with her big eyes. The guy told me she was
born "just about 8 weeks ago" and that he sold the rest of the puppies - except
her. "She's the runt. Want her?"

With all the recklessness of someone not far enough into their 20s to make
responsible decisions - of course I wanted her. The man didn't wait for any more
discussion - jumped in his van and drove off, the clandestine dog deal
completed.

I headed back into the pet store, and plopped this little puppy in the cart - of
course all my coworkers wanted to pet her, say hi, offer their opinions on what
necessities I had to grab. I picked her up a big kong crab chew toy, a red
collar, and the best dog food I could afford... and realized I had no way of
getting all this and my new friend home on my bicycle. Had to text my roomate -
"Hey man... how do you feel about having a german shepherd puppy?" Pretending of
course, that it wasn't already a done deal and fishing for a ride. Well he
responded with something along the lines of "we should totally have a german
shepherd puppy!" He wasn't able to give me a ride home, so I called my dad. 

He didn't give me too much of a hard time about getting a dog - just the usual
dad talk about "responsibilities" and "commitment." He was right, of course. He
also completely understood when he pulled up in his jeep and saw her. I am so
fortunate that he took these photos of us, when we were young and small. 

{{<fbox>}}
0 Puppy1.jpg
0 Puppy2.jpg
0 Puppy3.jpg
{{</fbox>}}

The first night she was home she was quiet, and sleepy. I spent that entire
evening and night holding her and petting her. My roommate was thrilled - his
girlfriend much less so. He asked me what her name was and I still hadn't
thought of one - he sat down with me and we took turns holding her trying out
different names. I'm pretty sure he was the first to suggest Mieke - jokingly,
"A common German girls name!" (Eurotrip)

We worked out a whole schedule for taking care of her - it wasn't difficult, he
worked nights and I worked days (except for the odd early morning stocking
shift).

The next day she was a totally different dog - no longer sleepy, quiet, and
calm. She woke up with **energy**, and decided she wanted to bite and chew and
run. She played hard, and to this day I still have faint scars from her sharp
little puppy teeth. We went on walks, and wrassled in the house as much as
possible. I took her over to my dad's when I could and she played with his
dogs... as much as they would tolerate. She was 90% teeth.

I got her enrolled in training classes at the pet store - a perk of working
there was one free 7 week course. She loved learning, and was very motivated by
attention and snacks. 
{{<fbox>}}
0 Puppy4.jpg
0 Puppy5.jpg
0 Puppy6.jpg
{{</fbox>}} 

Not long after, our lease was up for renewal, and they told us that we couldn't
have a German Shepherd. They were on the short list of not approved breeds of
dogs by the complex. We decided we needed a place with a yard for her to run
anyway, and found a house in South Phoenix for rent that had a yard, more space
and even a pool. 

Have you ever tried to teach a dog to swim? It's one of those things that you
think animals would just "know", right? Well, Mieke never could figure out how
to swim. We tried everything we could think of - she absolutely hated being in
the water, and hated us being in the water. We had friends with dogs who would come
over and go swimming - Mieke would bark furiously and run around the pool trying
to get them out.

Other dogs never seemed to understand Mieke - they usually treated her like she
was a totally different animal, not speaking their language. The cliche saying
is that dogs take after their people - I never really understand people. Mieke
and I understood each other though. I respected her dogness and spirit. She
probably could have been trained to be better behaved, but I loved her
personality - as destructive as it was sometimes.

She grew in size rapidly - until she was 60 pounds of energetic, loud, bitey
terror. Never liked to cuddle - I would usually have to wrassle her until she
sorta-kinda accepted the affection. Usually she would relax for a few moments,
then flail, bite and scamper away.

A couple of years passed, a few girlfriends, a few apartments, and some hard
times. Mieke was very much there for me - she never let me feel down, would bite
and play aggressively until I felt better. No matter how hard of a time I was
having, I wanted to be a better person for her. We'd go on drives. She loved car
rides, and would rest her head on my shoulder begging for cheez-its as I drove.
I enrolled at the community college, and then decided to move to Tucson to
pursue a degree at the university.

Tucson is very much where my life began. Shortly after moving there, at an
office job, I met a girl who I thought was far too cool to be interested in me.
I wanted to see what Mieke thought of her, and how she reacted to Mieke. Mieke
didn't really like any of my girlfriends, and it turns out she was an excellent
judge of character. I offered this girl a ride home, said that I could just pick
her up at the end of her shift. I went home, picked up Mieke, gave her the
rundown on what we were going to do (dog didn't care, she was just stoked to go
on a car ride), and left to take this new girl home.

I pulled up, and this girl jumped in and was immediately ambushed by Mieke with
all sorts of love, affection and excitement. Even more surprising, she was all
about Mieke. I started driving her home regularly, and the next time she saw
Mieke was the first time she came over to my apartment for dinner. She came in
the door, and immediately got down and started playing with Mieke, and Mieke
played with her.

Gerri and I started dating, and the first trip we took was with Mieke up Mt.
Lemmon to go camping. One of our favorite stories about Mieke was from this
trip. Dog and I were sleeping, and Gerri unzipped the tent to sneak out and use
the facilities. Not sure how, but Mieke **bolted** out into the darkness. Full
dog speed. Gerri and I both went out after her, and heard a guy yell in terror
as Mieke tore through his campsite. She came back when Gerri called, and we had
a good laugh about how scary she must have seemed coming out of the darkness up
there at that guy.

{{<fbox>}}
1 002.JPG
1 030.JPG
1 028.JPG
1 011.JPG
1 036.JPG
{{</fbox>}}

That was August of 2014 - Gerri moved in to the small apartment with Mieke and I
shortly after. Another favorite story we share often is how we would count
change to buy fresh tortillas from the tortilleria across the street. Well, one
day we left the stack of tortillas on the counter to go do something really
quick - change laundry, maybe. Well, we came back in and found that Mieke had
taken a single bite out of the stack of tortillas. Big ol' dog bite right
through the side of a dozen of them. She left the rest on the floor, and didn't
even seem sorry about it. She knew better than to put her paws on the counter
but would somehow stretch her neck so long that she could get just about
anything left out. Dog enjoyed many pastries and breads that she swiped.   

One time at that apartment we were coming back from a walk with Mieke, early in
the morning. Mieke did not like other dogs - she would make a lot of noise and
spaz out on the leash whenever she saw one. We usually tried to avoid animals,
as best we could living in an apartment near other people. Well, that morning we
came around the corner and face to face with a javelina. Gerri and I both braced to try and
separate dog from this wild desert critter. Mieke stared at the
javelina, and it stared right back at her - but they somehow both decided that
it was better to just let the other be. 

We had a small patio at the apartment in Tucson - and we tried to grow as much
as possible back there. Gerri was out there watering plants, and I heard her
yell at Mieke and then all of a sudden Mieke was tearing through the apartment.
Mieke ran into the living room and started flopping around, being all weird.
Rubbing her face on the carpet and then zooming around like she was possessed.
When I finally got a hold of her to stop her from knocking over furniture and
things - her lips were all swollen. She chomped a bee, apparently. She seemed
totally happy about it, all things considered.  

{{<fbox>}}
2 Tucson1.jpg
2 Tucson2.jpg
2 Tucson3.jpg
{{</fbox>}}

2016 was a watershed year for all three of us - and I don't think any of us were
ready for life with a baby. Mieke took her big sister role seriously, and was
very calm and gentle with Kara. Kara was a very angry baby - loud and hardly
seemed to sleep. When she did sleep, it was only swaddled and laying on the
couch or in her rocking swing. Mieke would gently sneak up next to her and lay
there, watching over her little sister... until Kara would kick her feets. Then
she'd let out a big, exasperated, dog sigh and slunk off to the bedroom to crawl
into bed with whoever was in there at the time.

I would pick Mieke up and rock her sometimes, after rocking Kara - just so she
wouldn't feel left out. She reluctantly accepted the attention, but would
usually flail and bite after a bit. 

{{<fbox>}}
2 Tucson4.jpg
{{</fbox>}}
{{<fbox>}}
2 Tucson5.jpg
2 Tucson6.jpg
2 Tucson7.jpg
2 Tucson9.jpg
2 Tucson8.jpg
{{</fbox>}}

*To be continued, soon.*
