---
title: "Goblin Caves"
date: 2023-11-04 11:00:00 -0700
Author: "Zach Wilder"
Categories:
  - Programming
tags:
  - C
  - Roguelike
  - Goblin Caves
assets: "2023-11-04"
---
As a kid, I wanted to learn how to program to make computer games. That was the
original goal, anyways. I've always felt there is a weird sort of magic being
able to type structured sentences into a text file, ram it through a compiler
(sometimes with fun, cryptic looking incantations typed into the terminal), and
seeing something come to life on the other end. 

Programming has always been an on again/off again sort of hobby. I think it's
more the act of making something from nothing that draws me to it then actually
making something. A few years ago (actually closer to a decade, somehow) I found
the [Complete Roguelike
Tutorial](https://www.roguebasin.com/index.php/Complete_Roguelike_Tutorial,_using_python%2Blibtcod)
using Python and libtcod. I didn't know Python when I started the tutorial, but
the end result of that project was amazing - I had a mostly complete game. I
tweaked and customized, modified and played around with that project for a
while. Eventually hit a wall, probably due to my lack of knowledge with Python.

That project inspired me to try and learn C++, which I figured was a logical
leap since I had a pretty decent (completely informal and entirely from books)
set of skills with C. It didn't take long for me to want to attempt another
Roguelike.

That project was called [Barbarian](/tags/barbarian/), and it was a lot of fun
to work on - and probably the closest I've came to making a start at "the game"
I wanted to make as a kid. I never really felt comfortable with my C++ knowledge
though, and the project had issues I was never able to quite wrap my head around
fixing. A thing most books don't teach is how to actually "build" software, and
my conclusion was that most of Barbarian's code problems were architectural.

I think programming is like building a model out of legos. You start with little
pieces, and eventually you make a part that then connects to other parts. If
you're really good, the legos you make are reusable. There's certain (well
documented) patterns and strategies to make parts of your software that if you
adapt well, you can make them into anything. I went back into C programming to
learn more basic skills and patterns, and again, what better place to practice
all these little components then in a roguelike? A long, rambling sort of
introduction to my latest project. I started working last year on a roguelike,
but this time with a "clear" end goal. 

The project was supposed to be simple - a dungeon dive with a set number of
levels. Get to the bottom, kill the chief, get out. After that was accomplished,
I could use the project as a sandbox to play with all my other ideas. I named
this project **Goblin Caves** - the burly hero of this adventure is sent to slay
a Goblin Chief, who sits on his throne at the bottom of a labyrinthine cavern. 

{{<fancybox_gallery id=0
  src1="Title.jpg"
>}}

Currently, the project runs right in the terminal and uses
[ncurses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ncurses) to render everything. One of
the major goals is to make sure to not tie the game to ncurses - I may
eventually use SDL to draw everything on a window instead, which would be more
portable and more consistent. The entire project is hand rolled, and uses no
external libraries, other than ncurses and the system stuff. I wrote all of it,
and tried my best to keep things as generic as possible.

{{<fancybox_gallery id=0
  src1="Scratch_SS2206225.jpg"
  src2="scratch_SS220625-2.jpg"
>}}

I hit a snag last year, and it was a problem I had never solved in other
projects: time management. It's no fun if you and a goblin take turns whacking
at each other in lockstep - some goblins should be really fast, and some should
be slow. Your player should be able to speed up and slow down - from something
in the environment, a poison, a potion. When the bat swoops down from the
ceiling it should be able to attack a couple of times before you get a chance to
react. 

The way the game loop is structured is straight out of [Game Programming
Patterns](https://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/game-loop.html), basically the
engine does the following things in a constant loop:

- Handle Events
- Update
- Draw

Events are (in this project, and most of my projects) things like keyboard
presses, game state changes, etc. When the player presses a key, it's read here
and then interpreted in the player's update routine. Update is the big function,
and is responsible for translating the player's keypress into an action taken by
their avatar, a selection on a menu screen, or initiating a change in game
state. Draw is where all of this action is then translated into glyphs that are
then placed on the screen, showing the player the game.

Now, since this is a turn based game, all the entities that are
not the player don't update until after the player takes their turn. So the
update/draw loop has to run until the player can take their turn again. Each
"tick" through the loop checks all the actors (player/enemies) and if they can
take a turn, they take it. Otherwise, they gain  a set amount of energy. Then,
when the player can take a turn, the update/draw loop breaks, and waits for the
player's input. Easy enough right? Well, when would animations play? What
happens when the actor list is bigger, or the monsters have more complex
behavior?

So, the solution is this: the update loop checks the player first, if they can
take their turn it doesn't update the rest of the actors. Player takes their
turn, spends energy. Now, when update is called again, the player doesn't have
the energy to take another turn, so they are granted a unit of energy. The game
then proceeds through the rest of the actors - taking turns and spending energy
immediately if they have enough to act, and giving a unit of energy if they
don't. Now, if (when) animations and sound are added, update can play them
immediately. Psuedocode:

{{< highlight C >}}
engine() {
    while(running) {
        handle_events();
        update();
        draw();
    }
}
update() {
    if(can_take_turn(player) return;
    update_monster(player); // Checks if player is dead, has moved, etc
    for(i = 0; i < monster_list.length; i++) {
        if(can_take_turn(monster_list[i]) {
            take_turn(monster_list[i];
        } else {
            grant_energy(monster_list[i];
        }
        update_monster(monster_list[i]);
    }
}
{{< / highlight >}}

Well, that **should** work. Except, remember how I said I wasn't going to tie
things to ncurses? Well, checking for keyboard input blocks the loop from
advancing with the way that routine is set up. And, for some reason I set up the
`draw()` routine to call ncurses directly, instead of just changing glyphs on a
fake screen, then drawing that fake screen once a loop. A temporary work around
that is currently in place (until I fix the silliness I wrote in with ncurses)
is that update loops until the player can take their turn, then breaks and waits
for input. This causes monsters to "jump" around and not be where the player
thinks they are (since draw isn't called at the right time). Adding `draw()`
into this temporary loop breaks the display of game messages...

So, that's where I'm at with the project now - divorcing the game from
ncurses. The way everything should work should be completely independent from
ncurses - even though I have no intention of doing actual tiles/graphics for
this game, I want the possibility to eventually have a command line switch for
an SDL interface. A few more screenshots featuring my attempts at ASCII art:

{{<fancybox_gallery id=0
  src1="Combat.jpg"
  src2="Help.jpg"
  src3="GameOver.jpg"
>}}

Some goals I wrote for myself when I started this project:
- Keep the game limited to 4 (or 5) major data types: Monster, Tile, Effects,
  Pickups. Currently, the player is a monster, but eventually it might be it's
own thing. 
- Saving/Loading, dungeon persistence (you can go back up stairs and return to a
  level you were at previously). I finished this part already, and it was
really not as complicated as I previously understood. Maybe a side effect of
doing this in C (and not C++)? 
- Map generation. Procedural levels, destructible tiles, pre-made "chunks" (like
  ADOM's vaults), dynamic field-of-view. This is the fun part, so naturally bits
and pieces of it exist in some form or another. Whenever I get tired of doing
something, I find myself here tweaking and adding stuff in.
- Time management - where I got stuck last year, and the thing I am currently
  working on.

Then there's the long wishlist items of things I want to implement, eventually.
Some highlights:
- Player abilities - spells, weapon attacks.
- Monster intelligence. Lots of ideas here, and none of them have been worked on
  yet. 
- Procedurally generated flora
- Animations
- "Flavor" text procedurally generated, from chunks in an external file. This
  would be amazing to accomplish - because then the game could be easily
translated to another language. 

And here's a little gameplay video, warts and all. You can see in the video that
the update/draw routine isn't quite right (players aren't where they should be).
The splatter after a goblin is smashed might need to be toned down a hair -
not sure if it's fun or excessive at this point. 

{{<fancybox_mv src="Gameplay.mp4" src2="Title.jpg">}}

The project is on [Github](https://github.com/zwilder/goblincaves), and I dump
all my ideas into a markdown file (`ideas.md`) on there. The `master` branch is
stable, and should work/build just fine on any flavor of Linux. The most recent
hare-brained ideas and work are on the `dev` branch. 
